106v

http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f218.image

p106v_a2

Tiles

right-middlethose of houses that are outdoors, ones [that are] a bit sandy seem to hold better in fire

Tiles with which one covers houses, the hardest and surest and recleaned of stones &amp; large gravel, are taken to mix in with the sand for molding. But, rather, it is necessary to reheat them just until they have been quite red for one or two hours, and crush them and pass them finely through a sieve.

Little turtles just out of the egg are really delightful to mold.

---------

Plaster]-->

middleIf the plaster is mixed with some dust or is not the hard kind, [...] in the fire and make [...]

The hardest plaster, as was said, is the best, being taken thusly totally raw from stones of this kind. Crush it as finely as possible and pass it through the most fine sieve or sleeve that you can. Having been made fine in this way, put a good amount in a cauldron or frying pan over an open flame. &amp; as it starts to heat up, stir it continuously. And heavy and lumpy though it is, it will become so light and so tractable that it will appear to you not to have any resistance to the said stirring, as though it were of water. Continue to keep stirring it continuously until it returns once again to being heavy and thick. And now this is the sign that it is cooked, but do not reheat it at all such that your stone alum brick be reheated &amp; that clay circles form. Because this must be the last reheating, and when everything else is ready, because the less that the plaster remains reheated &amp; the more suddenly it is put into the work, the better, because it takes rather better. It is not permitted to reheat it except when you want to mold. And to reheat it, put it, in fine, totally raw powder, in a cauldron on a clear flame &amp; do not give it too much [heat] in one go nor too fierce. Stir continuously with a long stick, turning around the cauldron to avoid the vapor. And in the middle, in the form of a figure 8 at the beginning, you will find it heavy [and] clayey because it is full of moisture, [and] when it heats up, it will start to throw off [the moisture] in some bubbles on the edges of the cauldron. And finally it will become liquid &amp; mealy and like bran and start boiling in the middle. Continue to stir continuously until you recognize that it has once again become heavy ʘʘ

Stone alum is that which binds well to sand.

Crocum ferri is fit for gold. It is this which, mixed into sand, breaks it up again &amp; keeps it hot.

---------

left-topPlaster

When you have it in stone form, choose the hardest pieces and those which do not easily break into small pieces with your nail, and clean it well of powder &amp; filth rather than crushing them with it.

left-middlePlaster alone does not sustain [...] but breaks up into lumps.





Keep reheated plaster, as is said here, one or two months well compacted in a dry place, if it's not the rainy season but rather fresh out it is more excellent for exquisite work.



left-middleIt must maintain its fire and turn red like lit charcoal.
