<html>
   <head>
      <title>
         <h3>Casting of lead and tin in plaster</h3>
      </title>
   </head>
   <body>
      
      
      
      
      
      <h3>Casting of lead and tin in plaster</h3>
      
       
      
      <p> If you want to cast any flat medal or any
         animal that is not very heavy, and that must not be burnt
         inside the mold, you can indeed cast in mixed plaster &amp;
         brique, as above; and not in plaster alone, because it
         contracts too much feeling an ardent fire if it is not so mixed. But, with the
         brick, it holds well. However, take heed to dry out your mold at length &amp; on a
         slow fire &amp; with patience, because there is no need to reheat it. But when your
         work is of flowers or other things that want their mold to be
         reheated &amp; set ablaze, mix the plaster with stone alum &amp; even with crocum. I
         have molded in very neat plaster &amp; brick &amp; it has
         sustained several castings. 
      </p>
      
      
      <p> I tried both plaster &amp; brick alone
         and molded en noyau with like the others. My mold was very
         clean, having lightly oiled &amp; rubbed my medal with spirits.
         I made my casting wide at the entrance, narrowing it as it goes along until it
         reaches the medal which is very thin. I notched the casting which embraced the medal
         well. I dried the mold out well on a slow fire &amp; finally, I heated it well
         without turning it red. I let it cool in such a way that I could hold my finger to
         it without burning myself. I made a line of 4 ℥ of tin, &amp;
         ix deniers of lead. I cast it red, and it
         was quite good and beautiful. Afterwards I put xii deniers of lead on top of 4 ℥ of
         tin. It is very good &amp; beautiful. 
      </p>
      
      
      <p> When there is nothing to burn in the mold, it is not
         necessary to reheat it for lead and tin. But for flowers and other things that must
         be burned, it is. 
      </p>
      
      
      
      
   </body>
</html>