<html>
   <head>
      <title>
         <h3>Molding grasshoppers and things too thin</h3>
      </title>
   </head>
   <body>
      
      
      
      <h3>Molding grasshoppers and things too thin</h3>
      
      
      
      <p> If you have to mold a piece of written-on paper that
         is too thin, after you have done the first cast and it has set, give
         a little thickness to the reverse of your paper with melted butter, which
         is the most appropriate means there is, &amp; for strengthening the wings of either a
         butterfly or a grasshopper, or any delicate part of an animal to which you need to
         give thickness. But take heed to apply this melted butter under the wing or
         in whichever place it will not be seen. For giving thickness to a pansy or other
         flowers, butter is not good, but rather wheat oil, which is
         soon dry &amp; holds firm. Wax would not be appropriate here for it is
         too hot once melted, and it makes the thing to which it is applied contract. But butter
         is
         amiable and handleable. 
      </p>
      
      
      <p>If you write on paper or on common carton and your
         letters are made with gum, the moisture of the clay plate
         (?) or the wet (?) sand for a noyau will moisten
         your letters and undo them. Write therefore with cinnabar mixed with oil,
         on oiled &amp; stamped (?) paper. 
      </p>
      
      
      
      <p> + Reheat your molds with
         charcoal firstly lit in the forge, so that the fire is not too hot and
         does not break the molds. And do not fire as strongly where the mold is thin as where
         it is
         thick. 
      </p>
      
      
   </body>
</html>